COVENANTS: Article VIII : Section 8.5: Parking. No Owner or any employee, agent or invitee of any Owner shall park, store or keep any vehicle on the Property except wholly within those portions of the Limited Common Elements designated as Owner’s allocated parking space(s) per Section 5.2(g) and in particular shall not block any entrances, drive aisles or fire lanes. Parking spaces allocated to cach Unit may be used only by the Owner of the Unit to which the parking spaces are allocated as a Limited Common Element and his agent and invitees. No boat, boat trailer, motor home, travel trailer, camper or other recreational vehicle may be stored on the Property at any time. No significant automobile repair shall be allowed in the parking areas on the Property. The Association shall have the right to tow any vehicle in violation of this Section 8.5 at its owner’s expense. Specifically, but not by way of limitation, the Association shall have the right, and so intends, to enforce the parking restrictions in this Section 8.5. In addition to having the right to tow any vehicle in violation of this Section, the Association shall have the right to levy fines as follows: (i) Fifty and No/100 Dollars ($50.00) for the first offense during any twelve (12) month period; (11) Seventy Five and No/100 Dollars ($75.00) for the second offense during any twelve (12) month period; and Gii} One Hundred and No/160 Dollars ($100.00) for more than two (2) violations in any twelve (12) month period. Fines imposed for violation of the parking restrictions shall be considered special assessments and shall be due and payable upon receipt of the parking violation. The Association shall have the right to enforce payment of such special assessment in the same manner as it may enforce the collection of any assessmenis under this Declaration and the Bylaws including charging of interest, payment of late fees and imposing of a lien against the Unit. Each Owner shall be responsible for any parking violation by Owner or anyone in Owner’s family, or by any guests or invitees of the Owner,