NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 1
Chapter 47F.
North Carolina Planned Community Act.
Article 1.
General Provisions.
§ 47F-1-101. Short title.
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the North Carolina Planned Community Act.
(1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-1-102. Applicability.
(a) This Chapter applies to all planned communities created within this State on or after
January 1, 1999, except as otherwise provided in this section.
(b) This Chapter does not apply to a planned community created within this State on or
after January 1, 1999, that satisfies either of the following:
(1) The planned community contains no more than 20 lots (including all lots that
may be added or created by the exercise of development rights) unless the
declaration provides or is amended to provide that this Chapter does apply to
that planned community.
(2) All the planned community's lots are restricted exclusively to nonresidential
purposes, unless the declaration provides or is amended to provide that this
Chapter does apply to that planned community.
(c) Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, G.S. 47F-1-104 (Variation),
G.S. 47F-2-103 (Construction and validity of declaration and bylaws), G.S. 47F-2-117
(Amendment of declaration), G.S. 47F-3-102(1) through (6) and (11) through (17) (Powers of
owners' association), G.S. 47F-3-103(f) (Executive board members and officers), G.S. 47F-3-104
(Transfer of special declarant rights), G.S. 47F-3-107(a), (b), and (c) (Upkeep of planned
community; responsibility and assessments for damages), G.S. 47F-3-107.1 (Procedures for fines
and suspension of planned community privileges or services), G.S. 47F-3-108 (Meetings),
G.S. 47F-3-115 (Assessments for common expenses), G.S. 47F-3-116 (Lien for sums due the
association; enforcement), G.S. 47F-3-118 (Association records), and G.S. 47F-3-121 (American
and State flags and political sign displays) apply to all planned communities created in this State
before January 1, 1999, unless the articles of incorporation or the declaration expressly provides
to the contrary, and G.S. 47F-3-120 (Declaration limits on attorneys' fees) applies to all planned
communities created in this State before January 1, 1999. These sections apply only with respect
to events and circumstances occurring on or after January 1, 1999, and do not invalidate existing
provisions of the declaration, bylaws, or plats and plans of those planned communities.
G.S. 47F-1-103 (Definitions) also applies to all planned communities created in this State before
January 1, 1999, to the extent necessary in construing any of the preceding sections.
(d) Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (c) of this section, any planned community created
prior to January 1, 1999, may elect to make this Chapter applicable to it by amending its declaration
to provide that this Chapter applies to that planned community. The amendment may be made by
affirmative vote or written agreement signed by lot owners of lots to which at least sixty-seven
percent (67%) of the votes in the association are allocated or any smaller majority the declaration
specifies. To the extent the procedures and requirements for amendment in the declaration conflict
with this subsection, this subsection controls with respect to any amendment to provide that this
Chapter applies to that planned community.
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 2
(e) This Chapter does not apply to planned communities or lots located outside this State.
(1998-199, s. 1; 2002-112, s. 2; 2004-109, s. 3; 2005-214, s. 1; 2005-422, s. 9; 2006-226, s. 15(a);
2013-34, s. 6; 2014-57, s. 1; 2022-62, s. 56.)
§ 47F-1-103. Definitions.
In the declaration and bylaws, unless specifically provided otherwise or the context otherwise
requires, and in this Chapter:
(1) "Affiliate of declarant" means any person who succeeds to any special declarant
rights and who controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with a
declarant. A person "controls" a declarant if the person is any of the following:
a. A general partner, officer, director, or employer of the declarant.
b. Directly or indirectly or acting in concert with one or more other
persons, or through one or more subsidiaries, owns, controls, holds with
power to vote, or holds proxies representing more than twenty percent
(20%) of the voting interest in the declarant.
c. Controls in any manner the election of a majority of the directors of the
declarant.
d. Has contributed more than twenty percent (20%) of the capital of the
declarant.
A person "is controlled by" a declarant if the declarant (i) is a general partner,
officer, director, or employer of the person; (ii) directly or indirectly or acting
in concert with one or more other persons, or through one or more subsidiaries,
owns, controls, holds with power to vote, or holds proxies representing more
than twenty percent (20%) of the voting interest in the person; (iii) controls in
any manner the election of a majority of the directors of the person; or (iv) has
contributed more than twenty percent (20%) of the capital of the person. Control
does not exist if the powers described in this subdivision are held solely as
security for an obligation and are not exercised.
(2) "Allocated interests" means the common expense liability and votes in the
association allocated to each lot.
(3) "Association" or "owners' association" means the association organized as
allowed under North Carolina law, including G.S. 47F-3-101.
(4) "Common elements" means any real estate within a planned community owned
or leased by the association, other than a lot.
(5) "Common expenses" means expenditures made by or financial liabilities of the
association, together with any allocations to reserves.
(6) "Common expense liability" means the liability for common expenses allocated
to each lot as permitted by this Chapter, the declaration or otherwise by law.
(7) "Condominium" means real estate, as defined and created under Chapter 47C
[of the General Statutes].
(8) "Cooperative" means real estate owned by a corporation, trust, trustee,
partnership, or unincorporated association, where the governing instruments of
that organization provide that each of the organization's members, partners,
stockholders, or beneficiaries is entitled to exclusive occupancy of a designated
portion of that real estate.
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 3
(9) "Declarant" means any person or group of persons acting in concert who (i) as
part of a common promotional plan, offers to dispose of the person's or group's
interest in a lot not previously disposed of, or (ii) reserves or succeeds to any
special declarant right.
(10) "Declaration" means any instruments, however denominated, that create a
planned community and any amendments to those instruments.
(11) "Development rights" means any right or combination of rights reserved by a
declarant in the declaration (i) to add real estate to a planned community; (ii) to
create lots, common elements, or limited common elements within a planned
community; (iii) to subdivide or combine lots or convert lots into common
elements; or (iv) to withdraw real estate from a planned community.
(12) Reserved.
(13) "Executive board" means the body, regardless of name, designated in the
declaration to act on behalf of the association.
(14), (15) Reserved.
(16) "Leasehold planned community" means a planned community in which all or a
portion of the real estate is subject to a lease, the expiration or termination of
which will terminate the planned community or reduce its size.
(17) "Lessee" means the party entitled to present possession of a leased lot whether
lessee, sublessee, or assignee.
(18) "Limited common element" means a portion of the common elements allocated
by the declaration or by operation of law for the exclusive use of one or more
but fewer than all of the lots.
(19) "Lot" means a physical portion of the planned community designated for
separate ownership or occupancy by a lot owner.
(20) "Lot owner" means a declarant or other person who owns a lot, or a lessee of a
lot in a leasehold planned community whose lease expires simultaneously with
any lease the expiration or termination of which will remove the lot from the
planned community, but does not include a person having an interest in a lot
solely as security for an obligation.
(21) "Master association" means an organization described in G.S. 47F-2-120,
whether or not it is also an association described in G.S. 47F-3-101.
(22) "Person" means a natural person, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, association, joint venture, government, governmental subdivision
or agency, or other legal or commercial entity.
(23) "Planned community" means real estate with respect to which any person, by
virtue of that person's ownership of a lot, is expressly obligated by a declaration
to pay real property taxes, insurance premiums, or other expenses to maintain,
improve, or benefit other lots or other real estate described in the declaration.
For purposes of this act, neither a cooperative nor a condominium is a planned
community, but real estate comprising a condominium or cooperative may be
part of a planned community. "Ownership of a lot" does not include holding a
leasehold interest of less that [than] 20 years in a lot, including renewal options.
(24) "Purchaser" means any person, other than a declarant or a person in the business
of selling real estate for the purchaser's own account, who by means of a
voluntary transfer acquires a legal or equitable interest in a lot, other than (i) a
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 4
leasehold interest (including renewal options) of less than 20 years, or (ii) as
security for an obligation.
(25) "Real estate" means any leasehold or other estate or interest in, over, or under
land, including structures, fixtures, and other improvements and interests which
by custom, usage, or law pass with a conveyance of land though not described
in the contract of sale or instrument of conveyance. "Real estate" includes
parcels with or without upper or lower boundaries, and spaces that may be filled
with air or water.
(26) "Reasonable attorneys' fees" means attorneys' fees reasonably incurred without
regard to any limitations on attorneys' fees which otherwise may be allowed by
law.
(27) Reserved.
(28) "Special declarant rights" means rights reserved for the benefit of a declarant
including, without limitation, any right (i) to complete improvements indicated
on plats and plans filed with the declaration; (ii) to exercise any development
right; (iii) to maintain sales offices, management offices, signs advertising the
planned community, and models; (iv) to use easements through the common
elements for the purpose of making improvements within the planned
community or within real estate which may be added to the planned community;
(v) to make the planned community part of a larger planned community or
group of planned communities; (vi) to make the planned community subject to
a master association; or (vii) to appoint or remove any officer or executive board
member of the association or any master association during any period of
declarant control.
(29) Reserved. (1998-199, s. 1; 2014-57, s. 2.)
§ 47F-1-104. Variation.
(a) Except as specifically provided in specific sections of this Chapter, the provisions of
this Chapter may not be varied by the declaration or bylaws. To the extent not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Chapter, the declaration, bylaws, and articles of incorporation form the basis
for the legal authority for the planned community to act as provided in the declaration, bylaws,
and articles of incorporation, and the declaration, bylaws, and articles of incorporation are
enforceable by their terms.
(b) The provisions of this Chapter may not be varied by agreement; however, after breach
of a provision of this Chapter, rights created hereunder may be knowingly waived in writing.
(c) Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this Chapter, a declarant may not act under a
power of attorney or proxy or use any other device to evade the limitations or prohibitions of this
Chapter, the declaration, or the bylaws. (1998-199, s. 1; 2013-34, s. 3.)
§ 47F-1-105. Taxation.
Extraterritorial common property taxed pursuant to G.S. 105-277.8 shall be assessed, pro rata,
among the lot owners based on the number of lots in the association. (2012-157, s. 3.)
§ 47F-1-106. Applicability of local ordinances, regulations, and building codes.
A zoning, subdivision, or building code or other real estate use law, ordinance, or regulation
may not prohibit a planned community or impose any requirement upon a planned community
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 5
which it would not impose upon a substantially similar development under a different form of
ownership or administration. Otherwise, no provision of this Chapter invalidates or modifies any
provision of any zoning, subdivision, or building code or any other real estate use law, ordinance,
or regulation. No local ordinance or regulation may require the recordation of a declaration prior
to the date required by this Chapter. (1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-1-107. Eminent domain.
(a) If a lot is acquired by eminent domain, or if part of a lot is acquired by eminent domain
leaving the lot owner with a remnant which may not practically or lawfully be used for any purpose
permitted by the declaration, the award shall compensate the lot owner for his lot and its interest
in the common element. Upon acquisition, unless the decree otherwise provides, the lot's allocated
interests are automatically reallocated to the remaining lots in proportion to the respective allocated
interests of those lots before the taking, exclusive of the lot taken.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, if part of a lot is acquired by
eminent domain, the award shall compensate the lot owner for the reduction in value of the lot.
Upon acquisition, unless the decree otherwise provides, (i) that lot's allocated interests are reduced
in proportion to the reduction in the size of the lot, or on any other basis specified in the declaration,
and (ii) the portion of the allocated interests divested from the partially acquired lot are
automatically reallocated to that lot and the remaining lots in proportion to the respective allocated
interests of those lots before the taking, with the partially acquired lot participating in the
reallocation on the basis of its reduced allocated interests.
(c) If there is any reallocation under subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the association
shall promptly prepare, execute, and record an amendment to the declaration reflecting the
reallocations. Any remnant of a lot remaining after part of a lot is taken under this subsection is
thereafter a common element.
(d) If part of the common elements is acquired by eminent domain, the portion of the award
attributable to the common elements taken shall be paid to the association. Unless the declaration
provides otherwise, any portion of the award attributable to the acquisition of a limited common
element shall be apportioned among the owners of the lots to which that limited common element
was allocated at the time of acquisition based on their allocated interest in the common elements
before the taking.
(e) The court decree shall be recorded in every county in which any portion of the planned
community is located. (1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-1-108. Supplemental general principles of law applicable.
The principles of law and equity as well as other North Carolina statutes (including the
provisions of the North Carolina Nonprofit Corporation Act) supplement the provisions of this
Chapter, except to the extent inconsistent with this Chapter. When these principles or statutes are
inconsistent or conflict with this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter will control. (1998-199,
s. 1.)
§ 47F-1-109. Reserved for future codification purposes.
Article 2.
Creation, Alteration, and Termination of Planned Communities.
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 6
§ 47F-2-101. Creation of the planned community.
A declaration creating a planned community shall be executed in the same manner as a deed
and shall be recorded in every county in which any portion of the planned community is located.
(1998-199, s. 1; 2012-18, s. 1.7.)
§ 47F-2-102. Reserved for future codification purposes.
§ 47F-2-103. Construction and validity of declaration and bylaws.
(a) To the extent not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter, the declaration,
bylaws, and articles of incorporation form the basis for the legal authority for the planned
community to act as provided in the declaration, bylaws, and articles of incorporation, and the
declaration, bylaws, and articles of incorporation are enforceable by their terms. All provisions of
the declaration and bylaws are severable.
(b) The rule against perpetuities may not be applied to defeat any provision of the
declaration, bylaws, rules, or regulations adopted pursuant to G.S. 47F-3-102(1).
(c) In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the declaration and the bylaws, the
declaration prevails except to the extent the declaration is inconsistent with this Chapter.
(d) Title to a lot and common elements is not rendered unmarketable or otherwise affected
by reason of an insubstantial failure of the declaration to comply with this Chapter. Whether a
substantial failure to comply with this Chapter impairs marketability shall be determined by the
law of this State relating to marketability. (1998-199, s. 1; 2013-34, s. 4.)
§§ 47F-2-104 through 47F-2-116. Reserved for future codification purposes.
§ 47F-2-117. Amendment of declaration.
(a) Except in cases of amendments that may be executed by a declarant under the terms of
the declaration or by certain lot owners under G.S. 47F-2-118(b), the declaration may be amended
only by affirmative vote or written agreement signed by lot owners of lots to which at least
sixty-seven percent (67%) of the votes in the association are allocated, or any larger majority the
declaration specifies or by the declarant if necessary for the exercise of any development right.
The declaration may specify a smaller number only if all of the lots are restricted exclusively to
nonresidential use.
(b) No action to challenge the validity of an amendment adopted pursuant to this section
may be brought more than one year after the amendment is recorded.
(c) Every amendment to the declaration shall be recorded in every county in which any
portion of the planned community is located and is effective only upon recordation.
(d) Any amendment passed pursuant to the provisions of this section or the procedures
provided for in the declaration are presumed valid and enforceable.
(e) Amendments to the declaration required by this Chapter to be recorded by the
association shall be prepared, executed, recorded, and certified in accordance with G.S. 47-41.01
or G.S. 47-41.02. (1998-199, s. 1; 2012-18, s. 1.8; 2013-34, s. 5; 2019-177, s. 4.3.)
§ 47F-2-118. Termination of planned community.
(a) Except in the case of taking of all the lots by eminent domain (G.S. 47F-1-107), a
planned community may be terminated only by agreement of lot owners of lots to which at least
eighty percent (80%) of the votes in the association are allocated, or any larger percentage the
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 7
declaration specifies. The declaration may specify a smaller percentage only if all of the lots in the
planned community are restricted exclusively to nonresidential uses.
(b) An agreement to terminate shall be evidenced by the execution of a termination
agreement, or ratifications thereof, in the same manner as a deed, by the requisite number of lot
owners. The termination agreement shall specify a date after which the agreement will be void
unless it is recorded before that date. A termination agreement and all ratifications thereof shall be
recorded in every county in which a portion of the planned community is situated and is effective
only upon recordation.
(c) A termination agreement may provide for sale of the common elements, but may not
require that the lots be sold following termination, unless the declaration as originally recorded
provided otherwise or unless all the lot owners consent to the sale. If, pursuant to the agreement,
any real estate in the planned community is to be sold following termination, the termination
agreement shall set forth the minimum terms of the sale.
(d) The association, on behalf of the lot owners, may contract for the sale of real estate in
the planned community, but the contract is not binding until approved pursuant to subsections (a)
and (b) of this section. Until the sale has been concluded and the proceeds thereof distributed, the
association continues in existence with all powers it had before termination. Proceeds of the sale
shall be distributed to lot owners and lienholders as their interests may appear, as provided in the
termination agreement.
(e) If the real estate constituting the planned community is not to be sold following
termination, title to the common elements vests in the lot owners upon termination as tenants in
common in proportion to their respective interests as provided in the termination agreement.
(f) Following termination of the planned community, the proceeds of any sale of real
estate, together with the assets of the association, are held by the association as trustee for lot
owners and holders of liens on the lots as their interests may appear. All other creditors of the
association are to be treated as if they had perfected liens on the common elements immediately
before termination.
(g) If the termination agreement does not provide for the distribution of sales proceeds
pursuant to subsection (d) of this section or the vesting of title pursuant to subsection (e) of this
section, sales proceeds shall be distributed and title shall vest in accordance with each lot owner's
allocated share of common expense liability.
(h) Except as provided in subsection (i) of this section, foreclosure or enforcement of a lien
or encumbrance against the common elements does not of itself terminate the planned community,
and foreclosure or enforcement of a lien or encumbrance against a portion of the common elements
other than withdrawable real estate does not withdraw that portion from the planned community.
Foreclosure or enforcement of a lien or encumbrance against withdrawable real estate does not of
itself withdraw that real estate from the planned community, but the person taking title thereto has
the right to require from the association, upon request, an amendment excluding the real estate
from the planned community.
(i) If a lien or encumbrance against a portion of the real estate comprising the planned
community has priority over the declaration and the lien or encumbrance has not been partially
released, the parties foreclosing the lien or encumbrance may, upon foreclosure, record an
instrument excluding the real estate subject to that lien or encumbrance from the planned
community. (1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-2-119. Reserved for future codification purposes.
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 8
§ 47F-2-120. Master associations.
If the declaration for a planned community provides that any of the powers described in G.S.
47F-3-102 are to be exercised by or may be delegated to a profit or nonprofit corporation which
exercises those or other powers on behalf of one or more other planned communities or for the
benefit of the lot owners of one or more other planned communities, all provisions of this act
applicable to lot owners' associations apply to any such corporation. (1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-2-121. Merger or consolidation of planned communities.
(a) Any two or more planned communities, by agreement of the lot owners as provided in
subsection (b) of this section, may be merged or consolidated into a single planned community. In
the event of a merger or consolidation, unless the agreement otherwise provides, the resultant
planned community is, for all purposes, the legal successor of all of the preexisting planned
communities, and the operations and activities of all associations of the preexisting planned
communities shall be merged or consolidated into a single association which shall hold all powers,
rights, obligations, assets, and liabilities of all preexisting associations.
(b) An agreement of two or more planned communities to merge or consolidate pursuant
to subsection (a) of this section shall be evidenced by an agreement prepared, executed, recorded,
and certified by the president of the association of each of the preexisting planned communities
following approval by owners of lots to which are allocated the percentage of votes in each planned
community required to terminate that planned community. Any such agreement shall be recorded
in every county in which a portion of the planned community is located and is not effective until
recorded.
(c) Every merger or consolidation agreement shall provide for the reallocation of the
allocated interests in the new association among the lots of the resultant planned community either
(i) by stating the reallocations or the formulas upon which they are based or (ii) by stating the
percentage of overall common expense liabilities and votes in the new association which are
allocated to all of the lots comprising each of the preexisting planned communities, and providing
that the portion of the percentages allocated to each lot formerly comprising a part of the
preexisting planned community shall be equal to the percentages of common expense liabilities
and votes in the association allocated to that lot by the declaration of the preexisting planned
community. (1998-199, s. 1.)
Article 3.
Management of Planned Community.
§ 47F-3-101. Organization of owners' association.
A lot owners' association shall be incorporated no later than the date the first lot in the planned
community is conveyed. The membership of the association at all times shall consist exclusively
of all the lot owners or, following termination of the planned community, of all persons entitled to
distributions of proceeds under G.S. 47F-2-118. Every association created after the effective date
of this Chapter shall be organized as a nonprofit corporation. (1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-3-102. Powers of owners' association.
Unless the articles of incorporation or the declaration expressly provides to the contrary, the
association may do all of the following:
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 9
(1) Adopt and amend bylaws and rules and regulations.
(2) Adopt and amend budgets for revenues, expenditures, and reserves and collect
assessments for common expenses from lot owners.
(3) Hire and discharge managing agents and other employees, agents, and
independent contractors.
(4) Institute, defend, or intervene in litigation or administrative proceedings on
matters affecting the planned community.
(5) Make contracts and incur liabilities.
(6) Regulate the use, maintenance, repair, replacement, and modification of
common elements.
(7) Cause additional improvements to be made as a part of the common elements.
(8) Acquire, hold, encumber, and convey in its own name any right, title, or interest
to real or personal property, provided that common elements may be conveyed
or subjected to a security interest only pursuant to G.S. 47F-3-112.
(9) Grant easements, leases, licenses, and concessions through or over the common
elements.
(10) Impose and receive any payments, fees, or charges for the use, rental, or
operation of the common elements other than the limited common elements and
for services provided to lot owners.
(11) Impose reasonable charges for late payment of assessments, not to exceed the
greater of twenty dollars ($20.00) per month or ten percent (10%) of any
assessment installment unpaid and, after notice and an opportunity to be heard,
suspend privileges or services provided by the association (except rights of
access to lots) during any period that assessments or other amounts due and
owing to the association remain unpaid for a period of 30 days or longer.
(12) After notice and an opportunity to be heard, impose reasonable fines or suspend
privileges or services provided by the association (except rights of access to
lots) for reasonable periods for violations of the declaration, bylaws, and rules
and regulations of the association.
(13) Impose reasonable charges in connection with the preparation and recordation
of documents, including, without limitation, amendments to the declaration.
(13a) Impose reasonable charges in connection with the preparation of statements of
unpaid assessments, which must be furnished within 10 business days after
receipt of the request, in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00)
per statement or request, and an additional expedite fee in an amount not to
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) if the request is made within 48 hours of
closing, all of which charges may be collected by the association, its managers,
or its agents.
(14) Provide for the indemnification of and maintain liability insurance for its
officers, executive board, directors, employees, and agents.
(15) Assign its right to future income, including the right to receive common expense
assessments.
(16) Exercise all other powers that may be exercised in this State by legal entities of
the same type as the association.
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 10
(17) Exercise any other powers necessary and proper for the governance and
operation of the association. (1998-199, s. 1; 2004-109, s. 4; 2005-422, s. 1;
2020-90, s. 4(c).)
§ 47F-3-103. Executive board members and officers.
(a) Except as provided in the declaration, in the bylaws, in subsection (b) of this section,
or in other provisions of this Chapter, the executive board may act in all instances on behalf of the
association. In the performance of their duties, officers and members of the executive board shall
discharge their duties in good faith. Officers shall act according to the standards for officers of a
nonprofit corporation set forth in G.S. 55A-8-42, and members shall act according to the standards
for directors of a nonprofit corporation set forth in G.S. 55A-8-30.
(b) The executive board may not act unilaterally on behalf of the association to amend the
declaration (G.S. 47F-2-117), to terminate the planned community (G.S. 47F-2-118), or to elect
members of the executive board or determine the qualifications, powers and duties, or terms of
office of executive board members (G.S. 47F-3-103(e)), but the executive board may unilaterally
fill vacancies in its membership for the unexpired portion of any term. Notwithstanding any
provision of the declaration or bylaws to the contrary, the lot owners, by a majority vote of all
persons present and entitled to vote at any meeting of the lot owners at which a quorum is present,
may remove any member of the executive board with or without cause, other than a member
appointed by the declarant.
(c) Within 30 days after adoption of any proposed budget for the planned community, the
executive board shall provide to all the lot owners a summary of the budget and a notice of the
meeting to consider ratification of the budget, including a statement that the budget may be ratified
without a quorum. The executive board shall set a date for a meeting of the lot owners to consider
ratification of the budget, such meeting to be held not less than 10 nor more than 60 days after
mailing of the summary and notice. There shall be no requirement that a quorum be present at the
meeting. The budget is ratified unless at that meeting a majority of all the lot owners in the
association or any larger vote specified in the declaration rejects the budget. In the event the
proposed budget is rejected, the periodic budget last ratified by the lot owners shall be continued
until such time as the lot owners ratify a subsequent budget proposed by the executive board.
(d) The declaration may provide for a period of declarant control of the association, during
which period a declarant, or persons designated by the declarant, may appoint and remove the
officers and members of the executive board.
(e) Not later than the termination of any period of declarant control, the lot owners shall
elect an executive board of at least three members, at least a majority of whom shall be lot owners.
The executive board shall elect the officers. The executive board members and officers shall take
office upon election.
(f) The association shall publish the names and addresses of all officers and board
members of the association within 30 days of their election. (1998-199, s. 1; 2005-422, ss. 2, 3.)
§ 47F-3-104. Transfer of special declarant rights.
(a) No special declarant right (G.S. 47F-1-103(28)) defined under this Chapter may be
transferred except by an instrument evidencing the transfer recorded in every county in which any
portion of the planned community is located. Except for the transfer of declarant rights pursuant
to subsection (c) of this section, the instrument is not effective unless executed by the transferee.
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 11
(b) Upon transfer of any special declarant right, the liability of a transferor declarant is as
follows:
(1) A transferor is not relieved of any obligation or liability arising before the
transfer and remains liable for warranty obligations imposed upon the transferor
by this Chapter. Lack of privity does not deprive any lot owner of standing to
maintain an action to enforce any obligation of the transferor.
(2) If a successor to any special declarant right is an affiliate of a declarant (G.S.
47F-1-103(1)), the transferor is jointly and severally liable with the successor
for any obligations or liabilities of the successor relating to the planned
community.
(3) If a transferor retains any special declarant rights but transfers other special
declarant rights to a successor who is not an affiliate of the declarant, the
transferor is liable for any obligations or liabilities imposed on a declarant by
this Chapter or by the declaration relating to the retained special declarant rights
and arising after the transfer.
(4) A transferor has no liability for any act or omission or any breach of a
contractual or warranty obligation arising from the exercise of a special
declarant right by a successor declarant who is not an affiliate of the transferor.
(c) Unless otherwise provided in a mortgage instrument, deed of trust, or other agreement
creating a security interest, in case of foreclosure of a security interest, sale by a trustee under an
agreement creating a security interest, tax sale, judicial sale, or sale under Bankruptcy Code or
receivership proceedings of any lots owned by a declarant, or real estate in a planned community
subject to development rights, or real estate subject to development rights for a planned
community, a person acquiring title to all the property being foreclosed or sold, but only upon the
person's request in an instrument recorded in every county in which any portion of the planned
community is located, succeeds to all special declarant rights (G.S. 47F-1-103(28)) related to that
property held by that declarant and requested by the person acquiring title. The judgment or
instrument conveying title shall provide for transfer of only the special declarant rights requested.
The mortgage, deed of trust, tax lien, or other conveyance to be foreclosed under this subsection
shall not be required to contain specific reference to an assignment of special declarant rights but
shall be deemed to include the special declarant rights as part of the right, title, and interest
encumbered by the mortgage, deed of trust, tax lien, or other conveyance.
(d) Upon foreclosure of a security interest, sale by a trustee under an agreement creating a
security interest, tax sale, judicial sale, or sale under Bankruptcy Code or receivership proceedings
of all interests in a planned community owned by a declarant, the declarant ceases to have any
special declarant rights and the period of declarant control (G.S. 47F-3-103(d)) terminates unless
either of the following applies:
(1) The judgment or instrument conveying title provides for transfer of all special
declarant rights held by that declarant to a successor declarant.
(2) The declarant transferred special declarant rights related to the appointment of
executive board members to another person pursuant to this section prior to the
foreclosure or sale.
(e) The liabilities and obligations of a person who succeeds to special declarant rights are
as follows:
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 12
(1) A successor to any special declarant right who is an affiliate of a declarant is
subject to all obligations and liabilities imposed on the transferor by this
Chapter or by the declaration.
(2) Unless otherwise specified in the declaration as to the holder of a mortgage
instrument, deed of trust, or other agreement creating a security interest, in case
of foreclosure of a security interest, sale by a trustee under an agreement
creating a security interest, tax sale, judicial sale, or sale under Bankruptcy
Code or receivership proceedings, a successor to any special declarant right
who is not an affiliate of a declarant, other than a successor described in
subdivision (3) or (4) of this subsection, is subject to the obligations and
liabilities expressly imposed by this Chapter or the declaration:
a. On a declarant which relate to the successor's exercise or nonexercise of
special declarant rights; or
b. On his or her transferor, other than:
1. Misrepresentations by the transferor or any previous declarant;
2. Warranty obligations on improvements made by the transferor
or any previous declarant or made before the planned
community was created;
3. Obligations and liabilities arising out of contractual agreements
between the transferor or any previous declarant and third
parties other than the declaration;
4. Breach of any fiduciary obligation by the transferor or any
previous declarant or his or her appointees to the executive
board; or
5. Any liability or obligation imposed on the transferor or any
previous declarant as a result of the transferor's acts or omissions
after the transfer.
(3) A successor to only a right reserved in the declaration to maintain sales offices,
management offices, signs advertising the planned community, and models, if
the successor is not an affiliate of the declarant, may not exercise any other
special declarant right and is not subject to any liability or obligation as a
declarant.
(4) A successor to all special declarant rights held by a transferor who is not an
affiliate of the declarant who succeeded to those rights pursuant to a deed or
other instrument of conveyance in lieu of foreclosure or a judgment or
instrument conveying title under subsection (c) of this section may declare in a
recorded instrument the intention to hold those rights solely for transfer to
another person. Thereafter, until transferring all special declarant rights to any
person acquiring title to any lot or real estate subject to development rights
owned by the successor, or until recording an instrument permitting exercise of
all those rights, that successor may not exercise any of those rights other than
any right held by his or her transferor to control the executive board in
accordance with G.S. 47F-3-103(d) for the duration of any period of declarant
control, and any attempted exercise of those rights is void. So long as a
successor declarant does not have the right to exercise special declarant rights
under this subsection, the successor declarant is not subject to any liability or
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 13
obligation as a declarant other than liability for his or her acts and omissions
under G.S. 47F-3-103(d).
(f) Nothing in this section subjects any successor to a special declarant right to any claims
against or other obligations of a transferor declarant other than claims and obligations expressly
arising under this Chapter or the declaration.
(g) For purposes of this section, "assignment of declarant rights" shall include any
assignment by the declarant of special declarant rights to a person, including, without limitation,
an assignment pursuant to this section. (1998-199, s. 1; 2014-57, s. 3.)
§ 47F-3-105. Termination of contracts and leases of declarant.
If entered into before the executive board elected by the lot owners pursuant to G.S.
47F-3-103(e) takes office, any contract or lease affecting or related to the planned community that
is not bona fide or was unconscionable to the lot owners at the time entered into under the
circumstances then prevailing, may be terminated without penalty by the association at any time
after the executive board elected by the lot owners pursuant to G.S. 47F-3-103(e) takes office upon
not less than 90 days' notice to the other party. (1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-3-106. Bylaws.
(a) The bylaws of the association shall provide for:
(1) The number of members of the executive board and the titles of the officers of
the association;
(2) Election by the executive board of officers of the association;
(3) The qualifications, powers and duties, terms of office, and manner of electing
and removing executive board members and officers and filling vacancies;
(4) Which, if any, of its powers the executive board or officers may delegate to
other persons or to a managing agent;
(5) Which of its officers may prepare, execute, certify, and record amendments to
the declaration on behalf of the association; and
(6) The method of amending the bylaws.
(b) The bylaws may provide for any other matters the association deems necessary and
appropriate. (1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-3-107. Upkeep of planned community; responsibility and assessments for damages.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in the declaration, G.S. 47F-3-113(h) or subsection (b)
of this section, the association is responsible for causing the common elements to be maintained,
repaired, and replaced when necessary and to assess the lot owners as necessary to recover the
costs of such maintenance, repair, or replacement except that the costs of maintenance, repair, or
replacement of a limited common element shall be assessed as provided in G.S. 47F-3-115(c)(1).
Except as otherwise provided in the declaration, each lot owner is responsible for the maintenance
and repair of his lot and any improvements thereon. Each lot owner shall afford to the association
and when necessary to another lot owner access through the lot owner's lot or the limited common
element allocated to the lot owner's lot reasonably necessary for any such maintenance, repair, or
replacement activity.
(b) If a lot owner is legally responsible for damage inflicted on any common element or
limited common element, the association may direct such lot owner to repair such damage, or the
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 14
association may itself cause the repairs to be made and recover damages from the responsible lot
owner.
(c) If damage is inflicted on any lot by an agent of the association in the scope of the agent's
activities as such agent, the association is liable to repair such damage or to reimburse the lot owner
for the cost of repairing such damages. The association shall also be liable for any losses to the lot
owner.
(d) When the claim under subsection (b) or (c) of this section is less than or equal to the
jurisdictional amount established for small claims by G.S. 7A-210, any aggrieved party may
request that a hearing be held before an adjudicatory panel appointed by the executive board to
determine if a lot owner is responsible for damages to any common element or the association is
responsible for damages to any lot. If the executive board fails to appoint an adjudicatory panel to
hear such matters, hearings under this section shall be held before the executive board. Such panel
shall accord to the party charged with causing damages notice of the charge, opportunity to be
heard and to present evidence, and notice of the decision. This panel may assess liability for each
damage incident against each lot owner charged or against the association not in excess of the
jurisdictional amount established for small claims by G.S. 7A-210. When the claim under
subsection (b) or (c) of this section exceeds the jurisdictional amount established for small claims
by G.S. 7A-210, liability of any lot owner charged or the association shall be determined as
otherwise provided by law. Liabilities of lot owners determined by adjudicatory hearing or as
otherwise provided by law shall be assessments secured by lien under G.S. 47F-3-116. Liabilities
of the association determined by adjudicatory hearing or as otherwise provided by law may be
offset by the lot owner against sums owing to the association and if so offset, shall reduce the
amount of any lien of the association against the lot at issue.
(e) The association shall not be liable for maintenance, repair, and all other expenses in
connection with any real estate which has not been incorporated into the planned community.
(1998-199, s. 1; 2013-34, s. 2.)
§ 47F-3-107.1. Procedures for fines and suspension of planned community privileges or
services.
Unless a specific procedure for the imposition of fines or suspension of planned community
privileges or services is provided for in the declaration, a hearing shall be held before the executive
board or an adjudicatory panel appointed by the executive board to determine if any lot owner
should be fined or if planned community privileges or services should be suspended pursuant to
the powers granted to the association in G.S. 47F-3-102(11) and (12). Any adjudicatory panel
appointed by the executive board shall be composed of members of the association who are not
officers of the association or members of the executive board. The lot owner charged shall be given
notice of the charge, opportunity to be heard and to present evidence, and notice of the decision.
If it is decided that a fine should be imposed, a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00)
may be imposed for the violation and without further hearing, for each day more than five days
after the decision that the violation occurs. Such fines shall be assessments secured by liens under
G.S. 47F-3-116. If it is decided that a suspension of planned community privileges or services
should be imposed, the suspension may be continued without further hearing until the violation or
delinquency is cured. The lot owner may appeal the decision of an adjudicatory panel to the full
executive board by delivering written notice of appeal to the executive board within 15 days after
the date of the decision. The executive board may affirm, vacate, or modify the prior decision of
the adjudicatory body. (1997-456, s. 27; 1998-199, s. 1; 2005-422, s. 4.)
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 15
§ 47F-3-108. Meetings.
(a) A meeting of the association shall be held at least once each year. Special meetings of
the association may be called by the president, a majority of the executive board, or by lot owners
having ten percent (10%), or any lower percentage specified in the bylaws, of the votes in the
association. Not less than 10 nor more than 60 days in advance of any meeting, the secretary or
other officer specified in the bylaws shall cause notice to be hand-delivered or sent prepaid by
United States mail to the mailing address of each lot or to any other mailing address designated in
writing by the lot owner, or sent by electronic means, including by electronic mail over the Internet,
to an electronic mailing address designated in writing by the lot owner. The notice of any meeting
shall state the time and place of the meeting and the items on the agenda, including the general
nature of any proposed amendment to the declaration or bylaws, any budget changes, and any
proposal to remove a director or officer.
(b) Meetings of the executive board shall be held as provided in the bylaws. At regular
intervals, the executive board meeting shall provide lot owners an opportunity to attend a portion
of an executive board meeting and to speak to the executive board about their issues or concerns.
The executive board may place reasonable restrictions on the number of persons who speak on
each side of an issue and may place reasonable time restrictions on persons who speak.
(c) Except as otherwise provided in the bylaws, meetings of the association and the
executive board shall be conducted in accordance with the most recent edition of Robert's Rules
of Order Newly Revised. (1998-199, s. 1; 2004-109, s. 6; 2005-422, s. 5.)
§ 47F-3-109. Quorums.
(a) Unless the bylaws provide otherwise, a quorum is present throughout any meeting of
the association if persons entitled to cast ten percent (10%) of the votes which may be cast for
election of the executive board are present in person or by proxy at the beginning of the meeting.
(b) Unless the bylaws specify a larger percentage, a quorum is deemed present throughout
any meeting of the executive board if persons entitled to cast fifty percent (50%) of the votes on
that board are present at the beginning of the meeting.
(c) In the event business cannot be conducted at any meeting because a quorum is not
present, that meeting may be adjourned to a later date by the affirmative vote of a majority of those
present in person or by proxy. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in the declaration or
the bylaws, the quorum requirement at the next meeting shall be one-half of the quorum
requirement applicable to the meeting adjourned for lack of a quorum. This provision shall
continue to reduce the quorum by fifty percent (50%) from that required at the previous meeting,
as previously reduced, until such time as a quorum is present and business can be conducted.
(1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-3-110. Voting; proxies.
(a) If only one of the multiple owners of a lot is present at a meeting of the association, the
owner who is present is entitled to cast all the votes allocated to that lot. If more than one of the
multiple owners are present, the votes allocated to that lot may be cast only in accordance with the
agreement of a majority in interest of the multiple owners, unless the declaration or bylaws
expressly provide otherwise. Majority agreement is conclusively presumed if any one of the
multiple owners casts the votes allocated to that lot without protest being made promptly to the
person presiding over the meeting by any of the other owners of the lot.
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 16
(b) Votes allocated to a lot may be cast pursuant to a proxy duly executed by a lot owner.
If a lot is owned by more than one person, each owner of the lot may vote or register protest to the
casting of votes by the other owners of the lot through a duly executed proxy. A lot owner may
not revoke a proxy given pursuant to this section except by actual notice of revocation to the person
presiding over a meeting of the association. A proxy is void if it is not dated. A proxy terminates
11 months after its date, unless it specifies a shorter term.
(c) If the declaration requires that votes on specified matters affecting the planned
community be cast by lessees rather than lot owners of leased lots, (i) the provisions of subsections
(a) and (b) of this section apply to lessees as if they were lot owners; (ii) lot owners who have
leased their lots to other persons may not cast votes on those specified matters; and (iii) lessees are
entitled to notice of meetings, access to records, and other rights respecting those matters as if they
were lot owners. Lot owners shall also be given notice, in the manner provided in G.S. 47F-3-108,
of all meetings at which lessees may be entitled to vote.
(d) No votes allocated to a lot owned by the association may be cast.
(e) The declaration may provide that on specified issues only a defined subgroup of lot
owners may vote provided:
(1) The issue being voted is of special interest solely to the members of the
subgroup; and
(2) All except de minimis cost that will be incurred based on the vote taken will be
assessed solely against those lot owners entitled to vote.
(f) For purposes of subdivision (e)(1) above, an issue to be voted on is not a special interest
solely to a subgroup if it substantially affects the overall appearance of the planned community or
substantially affects living conditions of lot owners not included in the voting subgroup.
(1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-3-111. Tort and contract liability.
(a) Neither the association nor any lot owner except the declarant is liable for that
declarant's torts in connection with any part of the planned community which that declarant has
the responsibility to maintain.
(b) An action alleging a wrong done by the association shall be brought against the
association and not against a lot owner.
(c) Any statute of limitation affecting the association's right of action under this section is
tolled until the period of declarant control terminates. A lot owner is not precluded from bringing
an action contemplated by this section because the person is a lot owner or a member of the
association. (1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-3-112. Conveyance or encumbrance of common elements.
(a) Portions of the common elements may be conveyed or subjected to a security interest
by the association if persons entitled to cast at least eighty percent (80%) of the votes in the
association, or any larger percentage the declaration specifies, agree in writing to that action;
provided that all the owners of lots to which any limited common element is allocated shall agree
in order to convey that limited common element or subject it to a security interest. The declaration
may specify a smaller percentage only if all the lots are restricted exclusively to nonresidential
uses. Distribution of proceeds of the sale of a limited common element shall be as provided by
agreement between the lot owners to which it is allocated and the association. Proceeds of the sale
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 17
or financing of a common element (other than a limited common element) shall be an asset of the
association.
(b) The association, on behalf of the lot owners, may contract to convey common elements
or subject them to a security interest, but the contract is not enforceable against the association
until approved pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. Thereafter, the association has all powers
necessary and appropriate to effect the conveyance or encumbrance, free and clear of any interest
of any lot owner or the association in or to the common element conveyed or encumbered,
including the power to execute deeds or other instruments.
(c) Any purported conveyance, encumbrance, or other voluntary transfer of common
elements, unless made pursuant to this section is void.
(d) No conveyance or encumbrance of common elements pursuant to this section may
deprive any lot of its rights of access and support. (1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-3-113. Insurance.
(a) Commencing not later than the time of the first conveyance of a lot to a person other
than a declarant, the association shall maintain, to the extent reasonably available:
(1) Property insurance on the common elements insuring against all risks of direct
physical loss commonly insured against including fire and extended coverage
perils. The total amount of insurance after application of any deductibles shall
be not less than eighty percent (80%) of the replacement cost of the insured
property at the time the insurance is purchased and at each renewal date,
exclusive of land, excavations, foundations, and other items normally excluded
from property policies; and
(2) Liability insurance in reasonable amounts, covering all occurrences commonly
insured against for death, bodily injury, and property damage arising out of or
in connection with the use, ownership, or maintenance of the common elements.
(b) If the insurance described in subsection (a) of this section is not reasonably available,
the association promptly shall cause notice of that fact to be hand-delivered or sent prepaid by
United States mail to all lot owners. The declaration may require the association to carry any other
insurance, and the association in any event may carry any other insurance it deems appropriate to
protect the association or the lot owners.
(c) Insurance policies carried pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall provide that:
(1) Each lot owner is an insured person under the policy to the extent of the lot
owner's insurable interest;
(2) The insurer waives its right to subrogation under the policy against any lot
owner or member of the lot owner's household;
(3) No act or omission by any lot owner, unless acting within the scope of the
owner's authority on behalf of the association, will preclude recovery under the
policy; and
(4) If, at the time of a loss under the policy, there is other insurance in the name of
a lot owner covering the same risk covered by the policy, the association's
policy provides primary insurance.
(d) Any loss covered by the property policy under subdivision (a)(1) of this section shall
be adjusted with the association, but the insurance proceeds for that loss are payable to any
insurance trustee designated for that purpose, or otherwise to the association, and not to any
mortgagee or beneficiary under a deed of trust. The insurance trustee or the association shall hold
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 18
any insurance proceeds in trust for lot owners and lienholders as their interests may appear. Subject
to the provisions of subsection (h) of this section, the proceeds shall be disbursed first for the repair
or restoration of the damaged property, and lot owners and lienholders are not entitled to receive
payment of any portion of the proceeds unless there is a surplus of proceeds after the property has
been completely repaired or restored, or the planned community is terminated.
(e) An insurance policy issued to the association does not prevent a lot owner from
obtaining insurance for the lot owner's own benefit.
(f) An insurer that has issued an insurance policy under this section shall issue certificates
or memoranda of insurance to the association and, upon written request, to any lot owner,
mortgagee, or beneficiary under a deed of trust. The insurer issuing the policy may not cancel or
refuse to renew it until 30 days after notice of the proposed cancellation or nonrenewal has been
mailed to the association, each lot owner, and each mortgagee or beneficiary under a deed of trust
to whom certificates or memoranda of insurance have been issued at their respective last known
addresses.
(g) Any portion of the planned community for which insurance is required under
subdivision (a)(1) of this section which is damaged or destroyed shall be repaired or replaced
promptly by the association unless (i) the planned community is terminated, (ii) repair or
replacement would be illegal under any State or local health or safety statute or ordinance, or (iii)
the lot owners decide not to rebuild by an eighty percent (80%) vote, including one hundred percent
(100%) approval of owners assigned to the limited common elements not to be rebuilt. The cost
of repair or replacement in excess of insurance proceeds and reserves is a common expense. If any
portion of the planned community is not repaired or replaced, (i) the insurance proceeds
attributable to the damaged common elements shall be used to restore the damaged area to a
condition compatible with the remainder of the planned community, (ii) the insurance proceeds
attributable to limited common elements which are not rebuilt shall be distributed to the owners of
the lots to which those limited common elements were allocated, or to lienholders, as their interests
may appear, and (iii) the remainder of the proceeds shall be distributed to all the lot owners or
lienholders, as their interests may appear, in proportion to the common expense liabilities of all
the lots. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, G.S. 47F-2-118 (termination of the
planned community) governs the distribution of insurance proceeds if the planned community is
terminated.
(h) The provisions of this section may be varied or waived in the case of a planned
community all of whose lots are restricted to nonresidential use. (1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-3-114. Surplus funds.
Unless otherwise provided in the declaration, any surplus funds of the association remaining
after payment of or provision for common expenses, the funding of a reasonable operating expense
surplus, and any prepayment of reserves shall be paid to the lot owners in proportion to their
common expense liabilities or credited to them to reduce their future common expense
assessments. (1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-3-115. Assessments for common expenses.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in the declaration, until the association makes a common
expense assessment, the declarant shall pay all common expenses. After any assessment has been
made by the association, assessments thereafter shall be made at least annually.
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 19
(b) Except for assessments under subsections (c), (d), and (e) of this section, all common
expenses shall be assessed against all the lots in accordance with the allocations set forth in the
declaration. Any past-due common expense assessment or installment thereof bears interest at the
rate established by the association not exceeding eighteen percent (18%) per year. For planned
communities created prior to January 1, 1999, interest may be charged on any past-due common
expense assessment or installment only if the declaration provides for interest charges, and where
the declaration does not otherwise specify the interest rate, the rate may not exceed eighteen
percent (18%) per year.
(c) To the extent required by the declaration:
(1) Any common expense associated with the maintenance, repair, or replacement
of a limited common element shall be assessed against the lots to which that
limited common element is assigned, equally, or in any other proportion that
the declaration provides;
(2) Any common expense or portion thereof benefiting fewer than all of the lots
shall be assessed exclusively against the lots benefitted; and
(3) The costs of insurance shall be assessed in proportion to risk and the costs of
utilities shall be assessed in proportion to usage.
(d) Assessments to pay a judgment against the association may be made only against the
lots in the planned community at the time the judgment was entered, in proportion to their common
expense liabilities.
(e) If any common expense is caused by the negligence or misconduct of any lot owner or
occupant, the association may assess that expense exclusively against that lot owner or occupant's
lot.
(f) If common expense liabilities are reallocated, common expense assessments and any
installment thereof not yet due shall be recalculated in accordance with the reallocated common
expense liabilities. (1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-3-116. Lien for sums due the association; enforcement.
(a) Any assessment attributable to a lot which remains unpaid for a period of 30 days or
longer shall constitute a lien on that lot when a claim of lien is filed of record in the office of the
clerk of superior court of the county in which the lot is located in the manner provided in this
section. Once filed, a claim of lien secures all sums due the association through the date filed and
any sums due to the association thereafter. Unless the declaration provides otherwise, fees,
charges, late charges, and other charges imposed pursuant to G.S. 47F-3-102, 47F-3-107,
47F-3-107.1, and 47F-3-115 are subject to the claim of lien under this section as well as any other
sums due and payable to the association under the declaration, the provisions of this Chapter, or
as the result of an arbitration, mediation, or judicial decision.
(b) The association must make reasonable and diligent efforts to ensure that its records
contain the lot owner's current mailing address. No fewer than 15 days prior to filing the lien, the
association shall mail a statement of the assessment amount due by first-class mail to the physical
address of the lot and the lot owner's address of record with the association and, if different, to the
address for the lot owner shown on the county tax records for the lot. If the lot owner is a
corporation or limited liability company, the statement shall also be sent by first-class mail to the
mailing address of the registered agent for the corporation or limited liability company.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Chapter, the association is not required to mail a
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 20
statement to an address known to be a vacant lot on which no dwelling has been constructed or to
a lot for which there is no United States postal address.
(c) A claim of lien shall set forth the name and address of the association, the name of the
record owner of the lot at the time the claim of lien is filed, a description of the lot, and the amount
of the lien claimed. A claim of lien may also appoint a trustee to conduct a foreclosure, as provided
in subsection (f) of this section. The first page of the claim of lien shall contain the following
statement in print that is in boldface, capital letters, and no smaller than the largest print used
elsewhere in the document:
"THIS DOCUMENT CONSTITUTES A LIEN AGAINST YOUR PROPERTY, AND IF THE
LIEN IS NOT PAID, THE HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION MAY PROCEED WITH
FORECLOSURE AGAINST YOUR PROPERTY IN LIKE MANNER AS A MORTGAGE
UNDER NORTH CAROLINA LAW."
The person signing the claim of lien on behalf of the association shall attach to and file with the
claim of lien a certificate of service attesting to the attempt of service on the record owner, which
service shall be attempted in accordance with G.S. 1A-1, Rule 4(j), for service of a copy of a
summons and a complaint. If the actual service is not achieved, the person signing the claim of
lien on behalf of the association shall be deemed to have met the requirements of this subsection
if service has been attempted pursuant to both of the following: (i) G.S. 1A-1, Rule 4(j)(1)c, d, or
e and (ii) by mailing a copy of the lien by regular, first-class mail, postage prepaid to the physical
address of the lot and the lot owner's address of record with the association, and, if different, to the
address for the lot owner shown on the county tax records and the county real property records for
the lot. In the event that the owner of record is not a natural person, and actual service is not
achieved, the person signing the claim of lien on behalf of the association shall be deemed to have
met the requirements of this subsection if service has been attempted once pursuant to the
applicable provisions of G.S. 1A-1, Rule 4(j)(3) through G.S. 1A-1, Rule 4(j)(9). Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in this Chapter, the association is not required to mail a claim of lien to
an address which is known to be a vacant lot on which no dwelling has been constructed or to a
lot for which there is no United States postal address. A lien for unpaid assessments is extinguished
unless proceedings to enforce the lien are instituted within three years after the filing of the claim
of lien in the office of the clerk of superior court.
(d) A claim of lien filed under this section is prior to all liens and encumbrances on a lot
except (i) liens and encumbrances, specifically including, but not limited to, a mortgage or deed
of trust on the lot, recorded before the filing of the claim of lien in the office of the clerk of superior
court and (ii) liens for real estate taxes and other governmental assessments and charges against
the lot. This subsection does not affect the priority of mechanics' or materialmen's liens.
(e) The association shall be entitled to recover the reasonable attorneys' fees and costs it
incurs in connection with the collection of any sums due. A lot owner may not be required to pay
attorneys' fees and court costs until the lot owner is notified in writing of the association's intent
to seek payment of attorneys' fees, costs, and expenses. The notice must be sent by first-class mail
to the physical address of the lot and the lot owner's address of record with the association and, if
different, to the address for the lot owner shown on the county tax records for the lot. The
association must make reasonable and diligent efforts to ensure that its records contain the lot
owner's current mailing address. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Chapter, there
shall be no requirement that notice under this subsection be mailed to an address which is known
to be a vacant lot on which no dwelling has been constructed or a lot for which there is no United
States postal address. The notice shall set out the outstanding balance due as of the date of the
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 21
notice and state that the lot owner has 15 days from the mailing of the notice by first-class mail to
pay the outstanding balance without the attorneys' fees and court costs. If the lot owner pays the
outstanding balance within this period, then the lot owner shall have no obligation to pay attorneys'
fees, costs, or expenses. The notice shall also inform the lot owner of the opportunity to contact a
representative of the association to discuss a payment schedule for the outstanding balance, as
provided in subsection (i) of this section, and shall provide the name and telephone number of the
representative.
(f) Except as provided in subsection (h) of this section, the association, acting through the
executive board, may foreclose a claim of lien in like manner as a mortgage or deed of trust on
real estate under power of sale, as provided in Article 2A of Chapter 45 of the General Statutes, if
the assessment remains unpaid for 90 days or more. The association shall not foreclose the claim
of lien unless the executive board votes to commence the proceeding against the specific lot.
The following provisions and procedures shall be applicable to and complied with in every
nonjudicial power of sale foreclosure of a claim of lien, and these provisions and procedures shall
control to the extent they are inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of Article 2A of Chapter
45 of the General Statutes:
(1) The association shall be deemed to have a power of sale for purposes of
enforcement of its claim of lien.
(2) The terms "mortgagee" and "holder" as used in Article 2A of Chapter 45 of the
General Statutes shall mean the association, except as provided otherwise in
this Chapter.
(3) The term "security instrument" as used in Article 2A of Chapter 45 of the
General Statutes shall mean the claim of lien.
(4) The term "trustee" as used in Article 2A of Chapter 45 of the General Statutes
shall mean the person or entity appointed by the association under subdivision
(6) of this subsection.
(5) After the association has filed a claim of lien and prior to the commencement
of a nonjudicial foreclosure, the association shall give to the lot owner notice of
the association's intention to commence a nonjudicial foreclosure to enforce its
claim of lien. The notice shall contain the information required in G.S.
45-21.16(c)(5a).
(6) The association shall appoint a trustee to conduct the nonjudicial foreclosure
proceeding and sale. The appointment of the trustee shall be included in the
claim of lien or in a separate instrument filed with the clerk of court in the
county in which the planned community is located as an exhibit to the notice of
hearing. The association, at its option, may from time to time remove a trustee
previously appointed and appoint a successor trustee by filing a Substitution of
Trustee with the clerk of court in the foreclosure proceeding. Counsel for the
association may be appointed by the association to serve as the trustee and may
serve in that capacity as long as the lot owner does not contest the obligation to
pay or the amount of any sums due the association, or the validity, enforcement,
or foreclosure of the claim of lien, as provided in subdivision (12) of this
subsection. Any trustee appointed pursuant to this subsection shall have the
same fiduciary duties and obligations as a trustee in the foreclosure of a deed of
trust.
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 22
(7) If a valid debt, default, and notice to those entitled to receive notice under G.S.
45-21.16(b) are found to exist, then the clerk of court shall authorize the sale of
the property described in the claim of lien by the trustee.
(8) If, prior to the expiration of the upset bid period provided in G.S. 45-21.27, the
lot owner satisfies the debt secured by the claim of lien and pays all expenses
and costs incurred in filing and enforcing the association assessment lien,
including, but not limited to, advertising costs, attorneys' fees, and the trustee's
commission, then the trustee shall dismiss the foreclosure action and the
association shall cancel the claim of lien of record in accordance with the
provisions of G.S. 45-36.3. The lot owner shall have all rights granted under
Article 4 of Chapter 45 of the General Statutes to ensure the association's
satisfaction of the claim of lien.
(9) Any person, other than the trustee, may bid at the foreclosure sale. Unless
prohibited in the declaration or bylaws, the association may bid on the lot at a
foreclosure sale directly or through an agent. If the association or its agent is
the high bidder at the sale, the trustee shall allow the association to pay the costs
and expenses of the sale and apply a credit against the sums due by the lot owner
to the association in lieu of paying the bid price in full.
(10) Upon the expiration of the upset bid period provided in G.S. 45-21.27, the
trustee shall have full power and authority to execute a deed for the lot to the
high bidder.
(11) The trustee shall be entitled to a commission for services rendered which shall
include fees, costs, and expenses reasonably incurred by the trustee in
connection with the foreclosure, whether or not a sale is held. Except as
provided in subdivision (12) of this subsection, the trustee's commission shall
be paid without regard to any limitations on compensation otherwise provided
by law, including, without limitation, the provisions of G.S. 45-21.15.
(12) If the lot owner does not contest the obligation to pay the amount of any sums
due the association or the validity, enforcement, or foreclosure of the claim of
lien at any time after the expiration of the 15-day period following notice as
required in subsection (b) of this section, then attorneys' fees and the trustee's
commission collectively charged to the lot owner shall not exceed one thousand
two hundred dollars ($1,200), not including costs or expenses incurred. The
obligation to pay and the amount of any sums due the association and the
validity, enforcement, or foreclosure of the claim of lien remain uncontested as
long as the lot owner does not dispute, contest, or raise any objection, defense,
offset, or counterclaim as to the amount or validity of any portion of the sums
claimed due by the association or the validity, enforcement, or foreclosure of
the claim of lien. Any judgment, decree, or order in any action brought under
this section shall include costs and reasonable attorneys' fees for the prevailing
party.
(13) Lot owners shall be deemed to have the rights and remedies available to
mortgagors under G.S. 45-21.34.
(g) The provisions of subsection (f) of this section do not prohibit or prevent an association
from pursuing judicial foreclosure of a claim of lien, from taking other actions to recover the sums
due the association, or from accepting a deed in lieu of foreclosure. Any judgment, decree, or order
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 23
in any judicial foreclosure or civil action relating to the collection of assessments shall include an
award of costs and reasonable attorneys' fees for the prevailing party, which shall not be subject
to the limitation provided in subdivision (f)(12) of this section.
(h) A claim of lien securing a debt consisting solely of fines imposed by the association,
interest on unpaid fines, or attorneys' fees incurred by the association solely associated with fines
imposed by the association may only be enforced by judicial foreclosure, as provided in Article
29A of Chapter 1 of the General Statutes. In addition, an association shall not levy, charge, or
attempt to collect a service, collection, consulting, or administration fee from any lot owner unless
the fee is expressly allowed in the declaration, and any claim of lien securing a debt consisting
solely of these fees may only be enforced by judicial foreclosure, as provided in Article 29A of
Chapter 1 of the General Statutes.
(i) The association, acting through its executive board and in the board's sole discretion,
may agree to allow payment of an outstanding balance in installments. Neither the association nor
the lot owner is obligated to offer or accept any proposed installment schedule. Reasonable
administrative fees and costs for accepting and processing installments may be added to the
outstanding balance and included in an installment payment schedule. Reasonable attorneys' fees
may be added to the outstanding balance and included in an installment schedule after the lot owner
has been given notice, as required in subsection (e) of this section. Attorneys' fees incurred in
connection with any request that the association agrees to accept payment of all or any part of sums
due in installments shall not be included or considered in the calculation of fees chargeable under
subdivision (f)(12) of this section.
(j) Where the holder of a first mortgage or first deed of trust of record or other purchaser
of a lot obtains title to the lot as a result of foreclosure of a first mortgage or first deed of trust, the
purchaser and its heirs, successors, and assigns shall not be liable for the assessments against the
lot which became due prior to the acquisition of title to the lot by the purchaser. The unpaid
assessments shall be deemed to be common expenses collectible from all the lot owners, including
the purchaser, its heirs, successors, and assigns. For purposes of this subsection, the term
"acquisition of title" means and refers to the recording of a deed conveying title or the time at
which the rights of the parties are fixed following the foreclosure of a mortgage or deed of trust,
whichever occurs first. (1998-199, s. 1; 2005-422, s. 6; 2009-515, s. 1; 2011-362, s. 1; 2013-202,
s. 3.)
§ 47F-3-116.1. Validation of certain nonjudicial foreclosure proceedings and sales.
All nonjudicial foreclosure proceedings commenced by an association before October 1, 2013,
and all sales and transfers of real property as part of those proceedings pursuant to the provisions
of this Chapter or provisions contained in the declaration of the planned community, are declared
to be valid, unless an action to set aside the foreclosure is commenced on or before October 1,
2013, or within one year after the date of the sale, whichever occurs last. (2013-202, s. 4.)
§ 47F-3-117. Reserved for future codification purposes.
§ 47F-3-118. Association records.
(a) The association shall keep financial records sufficiently detailed to enable the
association to comply with this Chapter. All financial and other records, including records of
meetings of the association and executive board, shall be made reasonably available for
examination by any lot owner and the lot owner's authorized agents as required in the bylaws and
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 24
Chapter 55A of the General Statutes. If the bylaws do not specify particular records to be
maintained, the association shall keep accurate records of all cash receipts and expenditures and
all assets and liabilities. In addition to any specific information that is required by the bylaws to
be assembled and reported to the lot owners at specified times, the association shall make an annual
income and expense statement and balance sheet available to all lot owners at no charge and within
75 days after the close of the fiscal year to which the information relates. Notwithstanding the
bylaws, a more extensive compilation, review, or audit of the association's books and records for
the current or immediately preceding fiscal year may be required by a vote of the majority of the
executive board or by the affirmative vote of a majority of the lot owners present and voting in
person or by proxy at any annual meeting or any special meeting duly called for that purpose.
(b) The association, upon written request, shall furnish to a lot owner or the lot owner's
authorized agents a statement setting forth the amount of unpaid assessments and other charges
against a lot. The statement shall be furnished within 10 business days after receipt of the request
and is binding on the association, the executive board, and every lot owner. The association, its
managers, or its agents may charge a reasonable fee for providing statements of unpaid
assessments, not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) per statement or request, and an
additional expedite fee in an amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) if the request
for a statement is made within 48 hours of closing.
(c) In addition to the limitations of Article 8 of Chapter 55A of the General Statutes, no
financial payments, including payments made in the form of goods and services, may be made to
any officer or member of the association's executive board or to a business, business associate, or
relative of an officer or member of the executive board, except as expressly provided for in the
bylaws or in payments for services or expenses paid on behalf of the association which are
approved in advance by the executive board. (1998-199, s. 1; 2005-422, s. 7; 2020-90, s. 4(d).)
§ 47F-3-119. Association as trustee.
With respect to a third person dealing with the association in the association's capacity as a
trustee under G.S. 47F-2-118 following termination or G.S. 47F-3-113 for insurance proceeds, the
existence of trust powers and their proper exercise by the association may be assumed without
inquiry. A third person is not bound to inquire whether the association has power to act as trustee
or is properly exercising trust powers, and a third person, without actual knowledge that the
association is exceeding or improperly exercising its powers, is fully protected in dealing with the
association as if it possessed and properly exercised the powers it purports to exercise. A third
person is not bound to assure the proper application of trust assets paid or delivered to the
association in its capacity as trustee. (1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-3-120. Declaration limits on attorneys' fees.
Except as provided in G.S. 47F-3-116, in an action to enforce provisions of the articles of
incorporation, the declaration, bylaws, or duly adopted rules or regulations, the court may award
reasonable attorneys' fees to the prevailing party if recovery of attorneys' fees is allowed in the
declaration. (1998-199, s. 1.)
§ 47F-3-121. American and State flags and political sign displays.
Notwithstanding any provision in any declaration of covenants, no restriction on the use of
land shall be construed to:
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 25
(1) Regulate or prohibit the display of the flag of the United States or North
Carolina, of a size no greater than four feet by six feet, which is displayed in
accordance with or in a manner consistent with the patriotic customs set forth
in 4 U.S.C. §§ 5-10, as amended, governing the display and use of the flag of
the United States unless:
a. For restrictions registered prior to October 1, 2005, the restriction
specifically uses the following terms:
1. Flag of the United States of America;
2. American flag;
3. United States flag; or
4. North Carolina flag.
b. For restrictions registered on or after October 1, 2005, the restriction
shall be written on the first page of the instrument or conveyance in print
that is in boldface type, capital letters, and no smaller than the largest
print used elsewhere in the instrument or conveyance. The restriction
shall be construed to regulate or prohibit the display of the United States
or North Carolina flag only if the restriction specifically states: "THIS
DOCUMENT REGULATES OR PROHIBITS THE DISPLAY OF
THE FLAG OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA OR
STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA".
This subdivision shall apply to owners of property who display the flag of the
United States or North Carolina on property owned exclusively by them and
does not apply to common areas, easements, rights-of-way, or other areas
owned by others.
(2) Regulate or prohibit the indoor or outdoor display of a political sign by an
association member on property owned exclusively by the member, unless:
a. For restrictions registered prior to October 1, 2005, the restriction
specifically uses the term "political signs".
b. For restrictions registered on or after October 1, 2005, the restriction
shall be written on the first page of the instrument or conveyance in print
that is in boldface type, capital letters, and no smaller than the largest
print used elsewhere in the instrument or conveyance. The restriction
shall be construed to regulate or prohibit the display of political signs
only if the restriction specifically states: "THIS DOCUMENT
REGULATES OR PROHIBITS THE DISPLAY OF POLITICAL
SIGNS".
Even when display of a political sign is permitted under this subdivision, an
association (i) may prohibit the display of political signs earlier than 45 days
before the day of the election and later than seven days after an election day,
and (ii) may regulate the size and number of political signs that may be placed
on a member's property if the association's regulation is no more restrictive than
any applicable city, town, or county ordinance that regulates the size and
number of political signs on residential property. If the local government in
which the property is located does not regulate the size and number of political
signs on residential property, the association shall permit at least one political
sign with the maximum dimensions of 24 inches by 24 inches on a member's
NC General Statutes - Chapter 47F 26
property. For the purposes of this subdivision, "political sign" means a sign that
attempts to influence the outcome of an election, including supporting or
opposing an issue on the election ballot. This subdivision shall apply to owners
of property who display political signs on property owned exclusively by them
and does not apply to common areas, easements, rights-of-way, or other areas
owned by others. (2005-422, s. 8; 2006-226, s. 15(b).)
§ 47F-3-122. Irrigation of landscaping.
Notwithstanding any provision in any declaration of covenants, no requirement to irrigate
landscaping shall be construed to:
(1) Require the irrigation of landscaping, during any period in which the U.S.
Drought Monitor, as defined in G.S. 143-350, or the Secretary of Environmental
Quality has designated an area in which the association is located as an area of
severe, extreme, or exceptional drought and the Governor, a State agency, or
unit of local government has imposed water conservation measures applicable
to the area unless:
a. For declarations of covenants registered prior to October 1, 2008, the
covenant specifically requires the irrigation of landscaping
notwithstanding water conservation measures imposed by the Governor,
a State agency, or unit of local government. The association may not
fine or otherwise penalize an owner of land for violation of an irrigation
requirement during a period of a drought as designated under this
subdivision, unless the covenant specifically authorizes fines or other
penalties.
b. For covenants registered on or after October 1, 2008, the covenant must
specifically state that any requirement to irrigate landscaping is
suspended to the extent the requirement would otherwise be prohibited
during any period in which the Governor, a State agency, or unit of local
government has imposed water conservation measures. The association
may not fine or otherwise penalize an owner of land for violation of an
irrigation requirement during a drought designated under this
subdivision, unless the covenant authorizes the fines or other penalties.
This authorization must be written on the first page of the covenant in
print that is in boldface type, capital letters, and no smaller than the
largest print used elsewhere in the declarations of covenants.
(2) For purposes of this section, the term "landscaping" includes lawns, trees,
shrubbery, and other ornamental or decorative plants. (2008-143, s. 19(b);
2015-241, s. 14.30(v).)