RULE 28: Subject: SATELLITE DISH SERVICE Text: In no event shall any exterior television antenna or satellite dish be mounted or placed on the
 exterior surface or patio balcony of any unit. A rooftop exterior
 television antenna and satellite dish area has been established for
 placement of these devices and this shall be the only area in and around
 the Building that such devices shall be permitted. In addition, in the
 event the Association contracts with one (1) satellite service vendor to
 provide building-wide subscription services for unit owners, then all
 owners shall obtain satellite service solely from this vendor. In all
 instances, antenna or satellite dish located on this rooftop area shall
 be screened from public view. Only in the event there is no Association
 authorized service vendor available to provide service as described
 above shall an owner be permitted to install a satellite dish or antenna
 on the roof. In this case, prior to installing the antenna or satellite
 dish, the owner shall furnish to the Association a copy of the owner's
 installation plans. The Association shall have the right to perform any
 portion of the installation work at the expense of the owner, or to
 require that any portion of the work be performed by contractors
 designated by the Association and in ways consistent with the existing
 infrastructure, shafts, and penetrations in the Building. The owner
 shall also be responsible for removal of any antenna or satellite dish
 and associated mounting and wiring when services for the device are
 cancelled. In addition, the owner shall be responsible for any damage
 caused by the removal of the antenna or satellite dish and associated
 mounting and wiring, including the sealing of conduits or other roof
 penetrations. Owners installing an antenna or satellite dish shall
 indemnify, defend and hold the Association harmless from and against any
 loss, damage, claim or other liability resulting from the installation,
 maintenance, repair, use and/or removal of the antenna or satellite
 dish, including but not limited to any damage to the corridor walls and
 ceilings as well as the roof of the Building or other property damage
 caused by installation or use or roof leaks.
 
