RULE 12: Subject: INTERIOR CONSTRUCTION Text: Should any owner wish to perform major interior construction in a unit, the owner must first obtain prior
 written approval from the Association for the full scope of work to be
 performed. Major interior construction will include any structural
 changes and modifications, hardwood floors and tiling. Interior
 construction does not include such items as occasional painting of one
 or two rooms, replacing appliances including hot water heaters, and/or
 any work already authorized by and through the Association such as HVAC
 repair and replacement. Owner shall submit written plans and specs in
 enough detail to describe the full scope of work, along with a list of
 all vendors/contractor with full contact information and insurance
 certificates, to the Association for review and approval. The
 Association has fifteen (15) days to approve or disapprove of any work
 to be performed, with such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. No
 work shall require access to any other unit, above or below, except with
 the unit owner's expressed written permission. Prior to construction
 commencement, vendors/contractors shall coordinate access to the
 building through management company. All construction materials and
 vendors should only use the freight elevator. Owners are responsible for
 ensuring that contractors have reserved the use of the loading dock and
 freight elevator through management company. A fine of \$500 per
 occurrence will be imposed to the homeowners account if the passenger
 elevator is used to transport any construction material in addition to
 any damages resulting. Construction vehicles must only park in the
 owner's assigned space and/or loading dock with prior permission or they
 will be subject to immediate towing. Owners shall always be responsible
 for the performance and actions of all vendors/subcontractors under its
 employ. Work shall take place only between the hours of 8:00 am and 5:00
 pm Monday through Friday and 9:00 am to 3:00 pm on Saturdays and no work
 shall be performed during nationally recognized holidays. Owners are
 prohibited from performing work on or about the common areas without
 prior written permission. Failure to do so shall carry a fine of \$500
 When the work is completed, the Association and owner shall inspect the
 common areas to determine if any damage is deemed to have been caused by
 owner's vendor/contractors. The owner will be responsible for the cost
 of all repairs to the common areas or other property owners' units.
 
